“Levi (leh-vee)” is professor

Extra assignments add to (40/25) 115/100 points. Homework due 1 week later at EOD.

Use Moodle && Piazza

History of Cryptography
-----------------------

* From Ancient History until middle 20th century: Cryptography was mostly military and diplomatic cyphers and other manual encryption.
* From middle 20th century: Banks and businesses adopt cryptography to protect transactions. integrity, authentication, and non-repudiation joined confidentiality as goals of cryptography.
* From end 20th century: Internet spreads cryptography to every user as it underlies TLS and other fundamental protocols. SSL/TLS, GSM, WiFi, Bluetooth, CC Chips, disks all use encryption.

Model of encryption: sender and receiver are distinct but want to send data across the distance between them. The third participant, the attacker, has access to the channel, and can eavesdrop on the data. Thus, the sender encodes the data with a key. Thus, the attacker can still read the data, but cannot understand it as it is encoded. Then, the receiver may decode the data using the same key.

Skytale (skih-tal-ay) was a spartan cypher back in 300BC. The transposition cypher relied on a belt wrapped around a rod and written to, then the belt is remmoved and the text is unreadable. The key is the size of the rod.

The “key space” is the set of all possible keys. In the case of the log, the key space is every size of regularly availible logs. A small key space makes it easy to break a cypher by trying all possible keys (exhaustive key search), which is a brute force attack.

Another example is the Ceaser Cypher, two concentric wheels that can be rotated to create a fixed offset. Implemented in 207\. The Ceaser Cypher has a key space of 25 (26th rotation gets all the way around).

A generalized version of the Ceaser Cypher uses a random permutation of the letters, creating a key space of 26!, which is sufficient for any application. However, this generalized cypher can be easily broken. A long key space is a necessary but not sufficient for a secure cypher. For this cypher, the issue is statistics around english language use, so frequent and infrequent letters are still easy to identify as the cypher preserves the ratios of use.

A cypher is considered broken when a method that is algorithmically faster than brute force is developed to approach it.

The enigma cypher was used by the germans. It was the first elecric cypher. It included a keyboard for typing, a lampboard to display the information, a plugboard for swapping input letter pairs, and a scrambler unit for encoding and decoding. Letters were usually organized into groups of five. The device encoded using three rotors, which used a collection of wires to create the monoalphabetic substitution within each rotor. However, the rotors rotated on each keystroke, changing the translation for each letter. Pushing a button closed a circuit within the machine, creating the letter. The rotors were also re-settable (initial position) and re-orderable for more combinations.

The order of the rotors and initial positions are part of the key space. There are 3!=6 rotor orders and 26^3 initial conditions. Each unit had six wires to create swaps. Thus, we have (26 choose 2), (24 choose 2), etc., but divided by the orders, as they do not matter, which is 6!=720\. We get a total key space around 2^53, which is certainly sufficient, while the change prevents the same frequency attacks as monoalphabetic substitution. However, enigma was still broken.

Well, it was not really enigma that was broken, but it was used in a way that weakened the system. Every morning, Germans distributed the daily key to the unit, but did not use it directly to encrypt messages. Instead, they generate a fresh message key for every message, encrypt the message key with the daily key, encrypt the message with the message key, then first decrypt the message key then the daily key.

Daily Key encrypts Message Key encrypts Message, then reverse.

In order to cope with transmission errors, the message key is repeated twice at the beginning of the message. For the message key, only the intital position of the rotors was changed, so the message key was only three letters, relayed twice. The allies built a machine to test for daily keys based on the message keys. The Polish built a machine by reverse engineering 6 enigmas from a user manual.

As the war approached, the Germans improved the system by increasing the number of rotors. The Polish machine was suddenly insufficient. The Polish sent their machines to the British. The British exploited weak keys “collies,” used by the same operators. The German rules for operators actually reduced the key space size as well. However, the main weakness was a well-structured, including the word “wetter” in the same position. The British built a machine on this idea and broke the keys (this part I know from the movie).

Four-Square-Cypher

Encode: take two letters. first letter in upper-left (UL) square, second in lower-right (LR). These stay fixed. For first letter, get row from UL and column from LR. For second letter, get col from UL and row from LR. Reverse to decode.

Break with common idiomorphs given that spaces and punctuation are maintained.