A key is strong if it is unpredictable, and weak if it is predictable. Even a statistically valid key can be weakened by an improper protocol. Frequency analysis is strong against cyphers that do not change the frequencies of the given letters.

Claude Shannon was key to founding information theory, which provided the theoretical foundation to networking. He was also an early influencer in encoding to push more information through a given channel. Information theory is based on the definition of perfect secrecy. Shannon proved the necessary condisitions for a cipher to be perfecly secure and proved that the one-time pad provides perfect secrecy.

Entropy is important in cryptography because it allows true randomness into the system.

Shanon’s ideas to build strong block siphers usable in practive were to create a complex cipher by repeated use of otherwise simple transformations, like bit shifting and XOR.

The DES (Data Encryption Standard) was designed at IBM in the 70s and was a symmetric key (same key on both sides) block cipher. It features a Feinstel structure, so the same struture can be used for encoding and decoding. Each function was made of a number of substitution boxes and a permutation box.

DES was implemented in hardware for a while. DES was standard, but we now know about the weaknesses and vulnerabilities. Most likely breakable by NSA in 70’s, easily breakable in late 90s due to distributing computing becoming too fast and powerful.

Two attacks against DES were linear cryptanalysis and differential cryptanalysis. Designers knew of DC and IC and optimized S-boxes to provide better ability to resist DES. 

New standard AES was announced in late 2001\. It has larger key size, 128-256 bits key size.

Whitfield Diffie and Martin Hellman published New Directions in Cryptography in the 1970s. Created a protocol for the digital exchange of keys, previously you had to keep the keys in paper, usually by agents with a security keys. They described the Diffie-Hellman protocol for key echange between unknown parties.

Public Parameters:

* A large prime p and a generator element g of Zp\* = {1, 2, ,,,p-1}
* Do modulo-p multiplication on this set.
* Due to the modulo the digits are a closed group, new members of the group are within a range.
* The generator element g can be multiplied by itself to get back to the original set of numbers

Alice chooses a random large number x and computed A = s^x mod p

Alice sends A to Bob

Bob selects random y and computes B = g^y mod p

Bob sends B to Alice

Bob computes k = (g^x) ^y mod p

Alice computes k = (g&y) ^x mod p

There exist one-way function, where given x, it is easy to compute f(x), but given y it is hard to find an x that satisfies y = f(x)

Then, you can publish an encryption key. This public key can be used to compute a message from a code…not sure how this really works in the key exchange step.

RSA public-key encryption:

key-pair generation

* Choose two large primes p and q (easy)
* n = pq, s(n) = (p-1)(n-1) (easy)
* choose e, such that 1 \< e \< s(n) and greatest\_common\_denominator(e, s(n)) = 1 (easy)
* Compute the inverse of d and e mod s(n) (easy known p and q)
* output public key: (e, n) (public exponent and mod)
* output private key: d (private exponent)

Encrypt

* Represent the plaintext message as an integer m in [0, n-1]
* compute the ciphertext c = m\*mod n

Decrypt

* compute the plaintext from the ciphertext c as m = c^d mod n

Security is typically related to the difficulty of solving some hard mathematical problem

 – e.g., factoring or discrete logarithm

provable security by reduction proofs:

 – we show that any efficient algorithm that breaks our crypto scheme could be used to efficiently solve a believed to be hard mathematical problem

 – this means that breaking our crypto scheme is at least as hard as solving the hard mathematical problem

there exist provably secure crypto systems, but most of them are not efficient (fast) enough for practical applications

most of the public key crypto schemes that we use in pracitce are not provably secure (or only partial proofs exist)

PGP (Pretty Good Privacy) is a software to encrypt and sign files including emails. It was the standard algorithms (RSA, etc) of the time (1991), implmeneted in C by Phil Zimmerman, and distributed for free

In 1991, congress discussed adding backdoors to software, which was passed after 9/11

First working version of PGP published in 1991 for free, worldwide. It was the first version of strong cryptography availible for the general population. However, he violated MIT’s RSA patent, and the usage rights that they had given to RSA Data Security Inc. and he was accused of exporting cryptography without a license, as crypto was considered a weapon until 1997\. Export controls were removed in 2000\.

Quantum cryptography operates at two levels: using quantum effects to solve traditional problems like key exchange in new ways (randomness in polorized photons), and using quantum computers to break modern ciphers efficiently.

P (polynomial) is problems that can be solved efficiently on traditional computers

NP (non-polynomial) is problems that cannot be solved efficiently on traditional computers 

NP-complete and NP-hard are hard even for a quantum computer. This is where post-quantum cryptography becomes useful, as it defines algorithms in or near those scopes. NIST (National Institute of Standards and Technology) is evaluating standards for post-quantum cryptography.

practical applications of cryptography:

* www HHTPS/TLS
* GSM/4G
* WiFi (WPA2)
* BlueTooth
* disk encryption
* encrypted cloud storage
* smart cards (credit card chips)
* ignition keys in cards
* electronic tickets
* digitally signed code for authenticity

Needed:

Python 3

PyCryptodome python library

hexeditor

kt.gy encoder