In symmetric key encryption, sender and receiver use the same key to encode and decode.

Within symmetric key cyphers, there are stream cyphers like RC4 and Salsa20, and block cyphers like AWS, TwoFish, and SlipJack

XOR, or exclusive or, is as follows:

* 0 + 0 = 0
* 0 + 1 = 1
* 1 + 0 = 1
* 1 + 1 = 0

It is a bitwise operation. If two bits are different we get 1, otherwise we get 0.

Properties:

* X xor 0 = 0 xor X = X
* X xor X = 0
* A xor B = B xor A
* if A xor B = C then A = B xor C and B = A xor C

Hexidecimal numbers have 16 digits, 0-9 & A-F. 4 bits (nibble/half-byte) is 1 hex digit, 1 byte is 2 hex digits, etc. For the conversion, prepend 0s to get to bits%4 = 0, then do the binary math [\*8, \*4, \*2, \*1] to convert to a number, then express that number in hex, for example, 0=0, 9=9, 10=A, 15=F.

xor hex: hex-\> binary, xor, resultant binary -\> hex

hex(0xdead^0xbeef) = 0x6042

A simple xor cypher represents a plaintext as a sequence of bytes. Then, we take a password and repeat is as many times as needed to match the length of the byte sequence. The encryption is by xor of the two sequences. To decrypt, xor again with the same repeated password. As P xor K = C, then C xor K = P xor K xor K = P.

Many files have long strings of zeros, so after cyphering with the password, the password’s hex will be repeated over and over again within those zeros.

Xor makes ordered character frequencies wider and shorter, as the most common letters are spread out over len(password) different possible characters.

To break the simple xor, sample the encoded text at each various lengths. When the ordered character frequencies changes significantly, that means that we have determined the key length and now common characters are now encoded the same, just as with the monoalphabetic cypher frequency attack.

Then, consider the most frequent character in the key. It is most likely space in plain text. Use xor to determine the character used to xor space to the character that was found. From there, sample starting at the second letter and repeat the process, then repeat this operation for the length of the key.

A one-time pad takes a random string of bytes which is xored with the plaintext. This prevents the above type of attack. This method provides perfect secrecy, as proven by Claude Shannon. Perfect Secrecy means that observing the encrypted message provides no information (in an information theoretic sense) about the original message. Formally, H(m|c) = H(m), where H(x) is the entropy (uncertainty) of X. Each potential key for each letter has an equal probability.

The one-time pad has a key size equal to the plaintext, which must be transfered to the other side. Handling these large keys is impractical in most applications. If you exchange N gigabytes of encryption (say, in person by thumb drive), then you can communicate N gigabytes of information perfectly securely in the future.

In a compressed file, every possible byte occurs with a similar frequency. But, compressed files have standard headers, which are structured, and can be used to get all or part of the password. Thus, a generic compression algorithm is not sufficient to safely use a simple xor cypher, but is may be possible to use a compression method and a simple xor cypher to encode data safely.

Acutal stream cyphers generate a pseudo-random set of information by a heuristic algorithm using a seed, then only the seed needs to be exchanged and unlimited information can pass between the two places.

There are both hardware and software based stream cyphers, most recently and commonly Salsa20

Inside the generator there is an internal state which is initialized with the seed, then updated using the function f after each step. The output is generated from the state from another function g. the effective size of this state space must be large, as the state may repeat for a time after a long time running, as a periodic cypher is not random. Thus the stream must be long enough that the period length is never repeated in practice, usually \>128 bits. The finite cypher is for speed.

Stream cyphers are generally very fast and require a relatively small amount of memory to store state compared to a full pad. The cyphertext always has the same length as the plaintext.

Synchronization is required between the sender and receiver, and stream cyphers do not provide any integrity protection, as an attacker may make changes to selected cyphertext characters and know exactly what effect these changes have on the plaintext (at least in terms of xor outcome, not necessarily human-readable output). This could, though, be used to change the size of a bank transaction. 

Encryption in general does not provide integrety protection.

It would be insecure to directly use the output of a linear feedback shift register (LFSR) as the key stream.

RC4 outputs a byte every time, while salsa 20 outputs larger blocks (512 bits)