With Linear Feedback Shift Resisters, the state is the register itself, and the last bit shifted out is passed into a non-linear function which combines it with the bits of the other resisters and outputs that bit as part of the XOR to stream.

RSA?4?RC4? uses a register of size equal to 256, number of possible bytes, then used initial state to create a permutation. Then, each output involves a swap of two bytes. The large size means it takes a long time before the keystream reverts to its initial state, at which point the entire cycle repeats because the algorithm is heuristic, so the keystream is periodic, but in practice a large enough state will product a long enough period that it would not be random.

Stream cyphers must stay synchronized otherwise the data will not be able to be xored and decoded, even if a single bit is missing.

Study tip: test is a subset of control questions from the end of the slideshows.

Block ciphers operate on blocks of bits (typically n=128 bits)

Block ciphers are stateless (main difference between stream and block)

They cannot be efficiently distiguished from a random permutation

The encryption algorithm is a function of a key and a plaintext

The decryption algorithm is the inverse of the encoding function, and is a function of the cyphertext and the same key

Block cyphers are a type of symmetric key encryption

Block cyphers are generally used for encryption, but can also be used as a building block for MAC functions (message integrity and authentication services), hash functions, (pseudo)random number generators, and key-stream generators for stream cyphers.

There are 2^n possible input blocks and 2^n possible output blocks for a block cypher of length N. The encoding algorithm is a bijective mapping from input to output blocks. The input list is an ordered list of the possible blocks and the output list is a random permutation of the possible blocks. Each key changes the mapping. The family of possible permutations are indexed by the key, and there are 2^k possible permutations.

Even if we know where some of the inputs map, every future map is equally likely.

Product cyphers use multiple layers of simple operations, which offer complementary, but individually insufficient, protection.

Shannon’s substitution-permutation method is this principal of repeated layers of substiutions and bit permutations. Subs work on part of the input, permutations mix the full bits. Substitutions are confusion, mixing the results, and permutations are diffusion, spreading this changes to other substitution lanes. Thus, the change of one bit in the input gives a .5 chance per bit in the output that that bit is different.

DES (Data Encryption Standard) (1977) used this sub-perm method. It also has a key scheduler and a Feistel structure. It was replaced in 2001 by AES. Split the input bits into two halves. Half goes into a function with the first key, k1, then is xored with the unmodified half. Then, the halves are swapped, and the original half is left while the other half is exposed to a second key in an encoding function, and the two halves are xored again. This continues for as long as there are keys.

The decoding algorithm does the same thing, but in an inverse, using the key scheduler to reverse the order that the text is exposed to the keys.

DES encodes, DES^-1 decodes, prove by removing inverses an then unspooling the operations by undoing swap pairs, xor pairs, and function pairs. This structure is the Feistal structure.

AES is the current block cypher method. AES parameters increased key size and block size to 128 bits, though keys can be 256 bits as well. It is not a feistal structure, but is still built from invertable elementary operations (inject key, substitute bytes, mix columns and shift rows instead of permutations). In general, the operations are faster than their inverses, its optimized for encryption.

Kerckhoffs’ Principle says that an encryption standard should be public, because a secure algorithm should assume that the attacker has access to the algorithm. No security by obscurity.

Attack models

* Objectives
  * systematic decoding
  * figuring out the key
* Capabilities (increasing levels of strength)
  * cyphertext-only attack (only has access to the cyphertext)
  * know-plaintext attack (has some snippets of plaintext and matching cyphertext)
  * (adaptive) chosen-plaintext attack (can send plaintext to oracle, which will respond with cyphertext encrypted with the unknown key)
  * (adaptive) chosen-cyphertext attack

Attack Complexity

* Data Complexity
* Storage Complexity
* Processing Complexity
  * Expected number of “basic operations” required for the attack
  * parallelization may reduce attack time but not processing complexity

Cyphers used in practice resist all four capabilities to a high level of complexity.

Exhaustive key search given a small number of plaintext-cyphertext pairs relies on the brute-force checking of every possible key (2^k-1) to see if it works. If the key works for all pairs, it is most likely the right key. On average, half of the 2^k keyspace must be searched before we found the key.

In the case where the plain text is 7 bits and 1 parity bit per byte, and a block is 8 bytes, then the key works if it yields all 8 correct paritiy bits, a chance of (1/2)^8^num\_blocks.

Algebreic attacks exploit weaknesses in the algebraic structure of a block cypher. These attacks are substantially more efficient than exhausive key search. 

The bit-complementation property of DES can be used tor educe the average complexity of exhaustive key search from 2^55 to 2^54\. Basically, we can try two keys per try, as each encryption tests its key and its complement.

The most powerful algebraic attacks against DES-like cyphers are differential and linear attacks.

Double encryption encrypts a message, then encrypts it again with a different key. Encrypting twice by the same method does not substantially increase the amount of time needed for an exhaustive key search as a meet-in-the-middle attack nullifies the advantage by discovering the second key while attacking from both ends. However, 3DES, or tripple DES, is actually useful, as the middle is the inverse of DES (with a different key), and was used for a while.

* backwards compatible with DES if key bundle (the three keys) are identical
* if they are independent key length is 3\*56 = 168 bits
* but 3 times slower

There are many block cyphers, including 5 AES finalists, many cyphers. Choose based on design assumptions and requirements, efficiency, security (key size, algebraic properties, etc), and patent/licensing.