Never hardcode keys in programming files.

Symmetric Key Encyrption: Attacks on CBC (three types):

### Content Leak Attack

Assume you have a long message with two equal encrypted blocks:

* Yi = Ek(Xi + Yi-1)
* Yj = Ek(Xj + Yj-1)
* Yi = Yj

Thus:

Xi + Xj = Yi-1 + Yj-1

Xor two of these previous blocks (i-1, j-1) and get xor sum of those, is xor sum of plaintext from both blocks. This means that information about the plaintext. The probability of two blocks of cyphertest being the same = 1-Pk. The probability of this is incredibly low for two blocks. However, as the length increases, so does the likelyhood of an overlap, approaching 1 at longer length in an S-shape, and with a steep-sloped inflection point of at (k=sqrt(n), .5), which is surprisingly small for a file. Assume, as standard, that the block function is a random function unknown to the attacker.

Thus small blocks are weaker because we more easily observe these identical blocks. That’s why AES increased block length as well as key size relative to DES. The key size still matters greatly, but the block length also affects security.

### The padding oracle attack

Assume two parties communicate using a block cipher in CBC mode, and use the repeated length padding scheme. 

What should the server do if there is an error in the padding? Recall that the padding must repeat the length, so without integrety protection it is easy to modify that last bit of information to trigger a bad padding error. Such an error leaks information.

This is a special version of the chosen cyphertext attack model, where we choose a cyphertext, but we do not obtain the corresponding plaintext, only some partial information about the result of the decryption. 

We can calculate the length, and therefore the values, of the padding by changing bytes one after another until a padding error is triggered. 

Now, having broken a few bytes from the end of the block, we want to break the rest of it. Add one to the padding, repeat the reversal, and discover another byte, which takes at most 256 calls to the oracle. Thus, on average 1024 tries to break an entire block.

### Predictable IVs

This is a chosen plaintext attack. We can add things to the input queue and see what their output is, and assume we can predict the value of the next IV to be used by the sender. Break plaintext by guessing the IV, where a correct guess will review part of the plaintext.

This is a theoretical attack, there are too many IVs to guess in practice, but in practice the majority of the IV is often fixed, which makes it possible to guess, which is why the IV must be unpredictable.

Summary:

* Blocks should be sufficiently large
* Avoid leaking information about the corrrectness of the padding (or other cryptographic verification)
* IVs must not be predictable.