In symmetric key encryption, the encryption and decryption keys are both private, you need to establish a shared secret. With public key encryption, the keys are different, so it is asymmetric key encryption. The encryption key is public, the decryption key is privately generated, so there is no need to securely establish a shared secret.

There is a 3 order of magnitude difference of speed between AES and RSA. AES is 1000 times faster as it is symmetric key.

The idea of digital envelope allows for higher performance encryption using public key. Encrypt the main message using AES on a random key, then encrypt the key using the receiver’s public key.

Prime factorization of large ((1024 || 2048 || 4098)-bit) composite integers is a hard problem that RSA is based on. The discrete log problem is another hard problem that can be used for asymmetric key encryption with thousands-bit numbers.

Semantic security is the idea that given two plaintexts and one cyphertext that is the encryption of one of the plaintext, you have no way of determining which plaintext it corresponds other than guessing. Basically, you can’t extract any meaningful information from the cyphertext. Block cyphers have this property.

With public key cyphers, you use the public key for encryptions. Thus, given a small number of plaintexts, you can decrypt by brute force by encrypting each plaintext and checking which matches. Public key cyphers by default do not provide semantic key security so they are not appropriate if there is a small plaintext space. We solve this by making the encryptions probabilistic, that is, mixing a random factor to the plaintext. Textbook RSA is not a semantically secure system, it is deterministic.

PKCS \#1 is “Public Key Cryptographic Standard” and it defines how to properly salt a message for RSA (sprinkle on a bunch of randomness)

RSA uses three algorithms: encryption, decryption, and key-pair generation. 

Key-pair generation:

* Generate two primes (guess and check)
* Multiply them together to generate the compund integer modulus, n, which is public and a part of the public key
* The other part of the public key is the exponent, e, which is 1 \< e \< phi(n), phi(n) = (p-1)(q-1).
* The encryption takes the plaintext m, representing it as a number, and raising it to e, then mod by n
* the private key exponent is d, cyphertext is c
* ​encryption `m^e mod n = c`
* ​decryption `c^d mod n = m`​

If m and e are small, it is possible that m^e is less than n, in which case c = m^e, which is easy to reverse by the e-th root.

A very common ‘e’ is e = 2^16 + 1\. It is nice for performance as the speed of the computation relies on the number of 1s in the binary representation of the exponent, and this e only has 2 1s in the binary representation (then, decryption is 100 times slower as d is mostly 1s). However, the same e requires that everyone has different ns. Using the chineese remainder theorem, it can be possible to find a common m^e with this common exponent, allowing easy discovery of plaintext. 

RSA has a homomorphic property, it is malleable. You can send it to a third party who can modify it without reading it. If you have two cyphertexts c1 and c2, you can obtain a valid cyphertext c3 by multiplying them together. Say we have a cyphertext c = m^e mod n and an oracle where we can send any cyphertext except c and get a plaintext. Compute c \* r^e, where r is a random number, and send it to the oracle which will decrypt, as it is not c, so the oracle will send you back m\*r, then divide by r to get m. PKCS protects against this in practice as well.

ElGamel is another public key method with the same three algorithms. The public key is from a large prime p, the generator element g, which generates a public finite set. The private key is a random number x. The public key is k = g^x mod p. No one can compute x from k. Given k, take m and generate a random y (probabilistic), and compute g^xy mod p. Then, the receiver gets g^y mod p. Then they can calculate g^xy and decrypt the message.

Elliptic curve cryptography is the same set of operations but in a different finite group. This group is a set of points from a discrete elliptic curve, added using a defined method. Then we can implement the same type of encryption but by adding points instead of repeated multiplication. It allows us to achieve higher levels of security with faster operations on smaller keys, faster than any other public key method except RSA with specific exponents chosen for speed.

Signatures are very similar to MAC functions, they are the asymmetric key equivalent. They are used to provide integrety protection and authenticity of messages, that guarantee that the message has not been modified and is from the claimed sender. It has a third property that MAC does not have, which is “non-repudiation of origin,” or the idea that the receiver can prove to a third party that the sender in fact sent the message. This is different than MAC. As MAC is a symmetric key method, the receiver could generate their own MAC and claim it was from the sender. However, as signatures are asymmetric key methods, only the sender could have generated a valid signature for the message, providing this third property.

Similar to RSA, Signature has the same key-pair generation function, then a signing function using the private key and the message and a verfication function taking the message, signature, and public key, so anyone can verify, not just the receiver. This is called broadcast authentication, and is useful for something like cars who want to verify each other’s positions quickly. 

The security proofs are similar to RSA, the attacker models are similar to MAC. Attackers always know the public key. If they only know the public key, then it is a key-only attack. A known-message attack lets the attacker observe some message-signature pairs. An adaptive chosen-message attack lets the attacker choose a message and obtain its signature from an oracle.

Again, the attacker objectives are forgery (generating individual fake valid messages) and key recovery (figuring out the private key).

Signing is again slow, so the hash-and-sign paradigm makes it more usable. Simply hash the message, then sign the hash, which is shorter, making the method faster. It is very important that this hash function is collision resistant, as the message itself is hashed, so it would be easy to find new messages with the same hash, allowing those other messages to be sent similarly signed or claimed as the original message.

PKCS 1 also applies on signing, providing a different signature on the same message on different runs. It again applies padding for structure and salting for randomness. To verify, apply the public key, extract the salt, and compute the hash.

ElGamel signatures, like the encryption, are probabilistic by design. Similarly, you can use ECC to make signatures.

A public key certificate authenicates the public key. When you use public key encryption, it is essential to use the public key of the intended recipient, as using an attacker’s public key makes it so that only they can decrypt the information. Mere distribution of the public key is not sufficient.

While it is possible to use physical (out of band) exchange for public keys, that removes some of the advantages of the method, and is impossible in many applications. The solution we use instead is called the public key certificate, a data structure that signs an id to a public key to verify its authenticity using the signature of a trusted party. Then, only the trusted Signing Authority / Certificate Authority key must be distributed by out-of-band channels, which scales better. These keys are also distributed as root keys, which are well known and trusted, which allows you to verify that they are correct. These root keys are included with the operating system certificate store or with the browser. 

Certificates have a validity period and expiration, so they must be replaced or renewed, and they can be revoked if a private key is lost or compromised. These certificates may be viewed in-browser.

Certificate Authorities are companies that sell certificates that are valid for a limited amount of time. Let’s Encrypt is a free public certificate authority. They must compy with strict security requirements around the protection and usage of private keys, called the basis of trust. They protect their infastrucutre physically and digitally in tamper-resistant hardware.

CAs are typically organized as a tree hierarchy where the root CA certifies its children, who certify their children, and so on until there are sufficient nodes to handle the traffic. The root is self-signed, which is not a real method of verification, you can generate your own self-signed certificates. This system is called a certificate chain.