A Secure Channel between two communicating parties provides integrity, authenticity, confidentiality, structure, and individuality of messages. It builds on top of encryption, signing, and other crypto building blocks to create this complete experience. It protects against viewing or reading messages, altering messages, spoofing message origin, and replaying old messages on the channel.

To establish a secure channel, it is necesary to set up a shared secret, then derive keys from that shares secret and initialize other parameters such as message sequence numbers.

Authenticated encryption simultaneously provides confidentiality and integrety protection of a message. There are two approaches:

The first uses two different keys for the two diffferent functions used, for example, encryption and MAC, and thus always requires two passes to protect the message. This approach may be more vulnerable to some chosen cyphertext attacks. Furthermore, they are less efficient than the second approach

The second methd uses a single key and signple primitive and either process in a single step or a some process in a more efficient version of the two-pass model. It also prevents chosen-cyphertext attacks.

For any generic combination, let ENC() be the complete encryption function and MAC() be the complete MAC function, without loss of generality from their standard primitives. 

Combinations may encrypt only the plaintext, the plaintext and the mac, or the mac of the encrypted message. The encrypted message then the mac of the encrypted message is the best of the approach as it will not be vulnerable to a chosen cyphertext attack as long as the encryption format is CBC.

There are also specialized encryption modes, like what we’ve seen earlier.

CCM: CTR Mode with CBC-MAC takes a message, K, associated data, and the nonce. It outputs an encrypted message Y with authentication tag T. CCM processes the meesage in two passes, not one.

Routers examine the headers of packats. We cannot extend the method, which is why this fits on as[dmolp;

GCM is a specialized counter mode of encryption that does not rely on CBC. It is almost as efficient as a single pass scheme, as the second pass is not a complete encryption step and is therefore much faster than CCM and equally secure. It computes the mac on the cyphertext. Most libraries, like Pycryptodome, support GCM, making it a practical choice for our field use.

Now that we have a confidential, integrity-protected message, we turn to replay detection. We basically put a sequence number with the data (for example, in the associated data of the GCM), and the sender and receiver each have a state and rules that we check and update to make sure that each new message has a higher number than what has been seen before.

The sender maintains a sending sequence and the receiver maintains a receiving sequence. In a channel, most likely both endpoints will send and receive, so each side with have a seperate sequence for each method (send and receive). In each case, the sequence number is only actually incremented after the message is received, decoded, verified, and accepted. If the sequence number is wrong (not state + 1) or the MAC value is not correct, just drop the message and don’t update the sequence number. 

This implicit sequence numbering only works well if messages do not get lost on the channel. A receiving window allows for communication on less reliable networks (like how IP packets are allowed to arrive out of order). Drop packets outside the window, within the window if already received, and within the window with invalid mac. If the MAC of a packet is correct and it is within or ahead of the window, accept it and if ahead of the window advance the window.

As a function of how many packets on the network, how big should the window be?

IP-sec uses a window size of 64 (order of magnitude: 10s). If the variation in path speed is high, the window must be larger.

Key derivation assumes that there is already a shared secret. The keys must be derived such that a comprimised key does not comprimise the secret itself, as the secret is the source of multiple keys. Thus, the key derivation function must be a one-way function (like a hash). It should also be pseudo-random and unpredictable to make it more difficult to guess other keys.

HMAC is a frequently used key derivation function with these properties. It has two inputs: a shared secret and a fresh random number that was exchanged during the establishment of the channel concatenated with a label to distinguish between the different keys that we have and mark the purpose of the key. HMAC uses a hash function like SHA, with a bit size chosen to get the desired key size. Thus, new keys can be created with the same secret and random number and a new label, and the hash function will make it significantly different than the other keys.

In addition to deriving keys, we also need to delete unused keys, as unused keys may be leaked to attackers. In direct-memory-access languages like C, this is straightforward, the memory can be freed then overwritten with random bytes. In managed language like Python and Java, you have to do more to make sure that the key actually disapears from memory.

The shared structure or format of a message is important so that the receiver can appropriately parse the message. 

There are again two approaches for defining message formats:

Message with a fixed structure: fixed size header that indicates variable message payload length, then a fixed length footer like a MAC value.

Message as a series of type-length-value triplets, where the type defines how to interpret what follows from a set of options, the length defines the length of the value (the previous two fields being a known length) and the value being the variable length data of some type. These triplets can be nested.

Base64 encoding converts binary to printable ASCII (which will not have newline characters).

When using CBC with a MAC, it is not necessary to encrypt the IV because the MAC verifies the integrety of the message against IV manipulation.