Random Number Generation

Motivations - random number (bits) are needed for various purposes, including for forming cryptographic keys (both symmetric and asymmetric) and other cryptographic parameters (e.g, unpredictable IVs, nonces, etc.) - random number generators available in standard programming libraries are not good for cryptographic purposes - example: congruential generator - output s\_{i+1} = (a /dot s\_i + b) mod n - has nice statistical properties - but it is predictable! - weak random number generators can easily destroy security even if very strong cryptographic primitives (ciphers, MACS, etc.) are used Random number bug in Debian Linux - introduced in 2006, discovered in 2008 - open source library - someone commented out a single line of code in the OpenSSL package of Debian Linux, because some code verification tools produced a warning on it - in C code you usually initialize variables, and in this case not all of them were - this crippled the seeding process of the OpenSSL random number generator - the only "random" value that was used to initialize the generator was the current process ID (15 bits long) - process IDs on Linux can take 32768 possible values - very small number of possibilities to try by an attacker! True random vs. pseudo-random numbers - A true random number is a number that cannot be predicted by an observer before it is generated - if the number is generated within the range [0, N-1], then its value cannot be predicted with any better probability than 1/N - the above is true even if the observer is given all previously generated numbers - true random numbers are not always available in sufficient quantity or fast enough (can require special hardware) - a cryptographic pseudo-random number generator (PRNG) is a mechanism that processes somewhat unpredictable inputs and generates pseudo-random outputs (fast and large quantity) - if designed, implemented and used properly, then an adversary cannot distinguish the PRNG output from a real random sequence

A true random number cannot be predicted by an observer before it is generated with better than random odds. However, these numbers are difficult to generate fast enough and often require specialized hardware. Thus, in practice, we use a mix of true random and pseudorandom (algorithmically generated) numbers. These Pseudo-Random Number Generators (PRNGs) must maintain an internal state, which is updated after every output and must be unpredictable even when observing multiple outputs.

Harvesting true random bits requires novel approaches:

* Taking the current time to high precision
* measuring the time between keystrokes
* recording mouse movement
* measuring disk access times
* Looking at individual aspects of a camera image or microphone input
* Using specialized hardware like thermal noise of resistors

These collected bits, depending on the method, may not be unpredictable or independent, and an attacker may even know or be able to influence some of them. What’s important is that the harvested bits contain SOME information which is unguessable to the adversary, enough to make a sufficiently large unknown random number.

There are three levels of attackers:

* Strong attacker has comprimised state at a point in time, we want to see if they can they calculate state in the future or past
* Medium attacker can observe or manipulate collected input samples, we want to see what they can modify
* Weak attacker can observe some outputs, which means that if strong cryptographic building blocks are used then they can’t get important data from the system.

If an attacker knows the time used as a random factor to the second, and the time is calculated to millisecond precision, then there are 10 bits of entropy, or ~2^10 possible values for the unguessable information. If the clock is more precise, and accurate to the microsecond, then there are 20 bits of entropy, or ~2^20 possible values. It is reasonable to assume that the attacker could figure out the second that something was generated at, or a narrow range, and 20 bits of entropy is really not much. This is one weakness in ANSI X9.17\. Another weakness is that only part of the state is updated, which in a stronger attacker model means that a compromised key is perpetually compromised.

Fortuna design principles: accumulate entropy from as many different sources as possible, reseed occasionally and ensure that PRNG is frequently reset to an unguessable state, and between reseeds, use strong crypto algorithms to generate output from the internal state.

Be careful with embedded devices to make sure that different devices have different random states. If processes generate long-term keys or their own entropy pools seeded only with data gathered at boot time, those keys are likely vulnerable.