Key Exchange is the process of ensuring that both sides of the channel have correct and secure keys.

One solution to this problem is to assume we have another channel (out-of-band channel) that is not accessible to the attacker, and use that channel to perform the key exchange. One example of an out-of-band channel is meeting in person or using a separate trusted network. 

SMS is considered an out-of-band channel for web interaction. This is why it is used for Multi-Factor Authentication online.

However, out-of-band channels require lots of assumptions and are often less convenient. Thus, we want to establish keys in-band. However, that’s not really possible.

Instead, we have methods for limiting the use of out-of-band channels, setting up a few keys then using those established keys to create new keys in-band.

A key exchange protocol is a sequence of message exchanges between parties that defines the format of messages and the rules for processing them to establish a shared secret key over a communication network.

In general, a protocol is defined between Alice and Bob, the parties who want to set up a shared secret. Trent may be involved as a trusted third party. Eve (or Mallory or Trudy) is an attacker who wants to obtain the key established between Alice and Bob or impersonate one participant to the other. Invoking these names is a good way to make computer scientists listen while you are rambling. 

Eve is a very capable attacker. The attacker model is:

* Eve wants to obtain an established key or impersonate someone else on the network
* Eve is also a legitimate participant in the network
* Eve has full control over the communications between the honest parties Alice and Bob. She can eavesdrop, modify, delete, inject, and replay messages on the network. The network itself is the attacker.
* However, she cannot break the underlying cryptographic primatives we used in the protocol.

Design Objectives:

* [secrecy]: When the protocol is executed by Alixe and Bob, no one else besides possibly Trent should know or be able to learn the value of the established key
* [authenticity]: If Alice beleives that she executed the protocol and established a new key with Bob, then bob was indeed present and he should believe that he executed the protocol and established the same key K with Alice.
* [Freshness]: Both parties should believe that a freshly established key is new / unused on the network

There are two types of protocols:

* Key agreement protocols:
  * Both parties give input from which the key is constructed. The new key is derived by Alice and Bob as a function of information contributed by each of them such that neither can predetermine the resulting value. For example, the Diffie-Hellman protocol, we learned about this protocol previously.
* Key transport protocols:
  * One party (Alice, Bob, or Trent) creates a new key and securely transers it to the other party. For example, Kerberos protocol, RSA-based key exchange in TLS

The Diffie-Hellman protocol provides secrecy and freshness (for a party honestly following the protocol), as that honest party can generate a new random number every time the protocol executes, generating a fresh key. However, it does not provide identity validation / authenticity. The attacker may send their own structured key to begin or complete the protocol.

An example protocol:

Alice generates K and sends Alice, Bob, and Ekalice(K) to trent, who sends Alixe, Ektrent(K) to Bob.

However, Eve may replace Bob in Alices message with herself, causing Trent to set up the key with her instead of Bob.

Adding a MAC computed on the entire key including the identifiers and encrypted key adds authenticity to the already encrypted protocol. However, it is not guaranteed as fresh, as Eve may repeat the message on the network. Then, the attacker may replay messages from an old session.

We can guarantee freshness by keeping a message buffer similar to the sliding window we recently discussed. We send random nonces that are unpredictable, even to trent, so that the mac only verifies with the nonce, so the message must have been generated within the window. This is similar to taking a picture with a newspaper showing, it proves that the picture was taken at the earliest at the date of publication of that newspaper. By using a nonce, there is no need for synchronized clocks or other shared precice measurements. However, this requires a seperate message and a temporary state to send, store, and verify the nonce, changing the structure of the protocol.

Nonces must be unpredictable otherwise the nonce can be guessed by the attacker, removing the guarantee of freshness as they could send a new nonce with an old message.

We can also use public key cryptography to secure messages, requiring an out of band channel to distribute the keys used. This does not require a trusted party, as both parties know each other’s public keys, but does require a certificate authority, as previously discussed.

Timestamps, Nonces, and a key agreement protocol with fresh contributions to the key are the three ways to ensure freshness.

Perfect forward secrecy is basically the property that something that is considered secret at a given time is still secret in the future. One reason we like Diffie Hellman is that it provides perfect forward secrecy while the others we have seen do not.

Diffie Hellman provides perfect forward secrecy. Alice and Bob start with fresh random secrets. After running the exchange, they compute the shared key. Once they are done with this, they delete the unneeded random secrets. Thus, they still have the long-term private key (shared secret) and the freshly established session key. After the session is over, they delete the session key. At this point in time, even if an attacker compromises their private keys, the attacker cannot generate the secrets or keys used or compute the messages that were sent. Thus a message that survives the exchange, along with a correct execution of the protocol including secret and key deletion, provide perfect forward secrecy.