The goal of a password based key exchange is to use a password, which is a preexisting shared secret, to derive keys.

One basic method is to have both parties hash the password and use the result as the key. The problem is that user-chosen passwords are not very random and come from a small space. An attacker might have a set of candidate passwords and try a dictionary attack, where they hash every password and brute-force guess. The strength of the protocol is determined by the size of the dictionary and the probability that the password is in the dictionary (it probably is IRL). Because this happens offline, there is nothing you can do on the server to rate limit attacks, making the attack very powerful and only limited. Adding a random factor makes keys different from communication and prevents precomputation attacks (one of the benefits of offline cracking). 

There are two places to go from here: to refine the offline generation to make dictionary attacks harder, or to do an online exchange protocol for key establishment like we learned about last time.

Place 1: offline slowdowns

Stretching increases the cost of a password guessing attack by using an iterative process for key generation that runs the one-way function many times (thousands of times), increasing the workload for an attacker by a nontrivial factor.

Salting increases the cost of a dictionary attack by preventing precomputation by adding a random factor.

PBKDF2 (Is the second, and currently used, password based key derivation function). It combines salting and many iterations. It uses a hashing function, password, salt, iteration count, and desired length to generate a key.

scrypt is designed to hinder ASIC or FPGA hardware-based computation by creating a large buffer, creating a memory requirement beyond what specialized hardware units generally carry, making either slower to calculate or more difficult to build the specialized circuits.

Place 2: interactive key exchange over network

This provides stronger security guarantees than PBKDF2 as the work factor is dependent on the interaction instead of trying to figure out an appropriate number of iterations that could slow down an attacker (or a future attacker with access to better tech).

Basic: Alice generates a key K and encrypts it with the hash of the password, then bob uses the hash of the password to obtain K. However, this has the same issue, as before, where the attacker can eavesdrop the communication and perform offline cracking.

Using a public key adds a layer of indirection to the process, solving our problem. The attacker may still try password candidates from a dictionary, but the relatively small password space is multiplied by the large key space from which the public key is chosen. You can compute the key, but cannot test it.

For key freshness, the generator has a fresh key because they generated it, and the receiver has freshness because the public key is fresh. This uses the idea of a nonce (number used once).

The pitfalls of this protocol are in the implementation, it is very easy to implement wrong leading to no appreciable expansion of the dictionary size or other such weaknesses. For example, a random generation would likely lead to numbers with small prime factors, which are easy to guess. This lets you throw away a large number of passwords from the dictionary (all that go to even for each run of the protocol, resulting in log(n) guesses on an n size dictionary). 

Before encrypting e, flip a coin and add 1 if heads. Then if the receiver gets an even e, subtract 1\. However, an attacker does not know if e is truly even or if 1 has been added, as the attacker does not have the password, preventing this log(n) time dictionary attack.

If (e, n) is not encrypted at all, then an attacker can impersonate the sender and select their own p and q and compute n, then chose an e that is not relatively prime to (p-1)(q-1), so bob cnnot verify if e is correct. This seriously limits the keyspace to (0, n-1), which is easy to guess relative to a full encryption (many input map to a few valid cryptograms).

We cannot consider asymetric key encryption as black boxes when implementing network key exchange protocols, we need to carefully consider what and how we are encrypting.