The likelihood of a CBC cypher with block size n and N=2^n possible blocks having repeated blocks is 2^n/2.

Message Authentication intends to protect against an attacker modifying the data, not just eavesdropping. Because we cannot prevent these modifications, we instead strive to detect modifications. We do this by computing a checksum or MAC (message authentication code) using a key, then calculate that again at the destination to make sure nothing was modified. This is again a symmetric key technique.

Checksums are also used to verify and repair transmissions to protect against accidental data loss. However, this keyless method does not protect against an attacker, as they do not have keys to preserve the integrety of the checksum.

Cryptographic hash functions maps arbitrarily long messages into a fixed-length output (n bits).

Notation:

* x: input message
* y = H(x): hash value / message digest / fingerprint

Applications:

* Store passwords securely
* increase the efficiency of digital signatures by signing the hash instead of the message (expensive operation is performed on small amount of data).
* The hash value of a message can serve as a compact representation image of the message

Examples: (MD5, SHA-1) (old/broken, don’t use these), SHA-2 family, SHA-3 family

Desired properties:

* Easy one-way computation: given x, H(x) is easy to compute
* Weak collision resistance (2nd preimage resistance): given an input x, it is computationally infeasible to find a second input x’ such that H(x’) = H(x). There are infinitely many inputs and finitely many outputs, thus infinitely many inputs map into each output. These values do exist but must be difficult to find.
* Strong collision resistance (collision resistance): it is computationally infeasible to find any two distinct inputs x and x’ such that H(x) = H(x’). While this looks similar to the first, it is quite different. With strong collision resistance, we don’t fix x, instead x and x’ can be any inputs. Any viable pair must be difficult to find.
* preimage resistance (one-way property): given a hash value y, for which no preimage is known, it is computationally infeasible to find any input x such that H(x) = y

Collision resistant hash functions can typically be modeled as a random function similar to block cyphers. Changing a single bit in the input has an avalanche effect that leaves approximately half of the output bits different.

Birthday paradox: when drawing elements randomly (with replacement) from a set of N elements, a repeated element will be encountered with high probability after about sqrt(N) selections.

In a group of sqrt(365) ~ 20 people, there is a higher than 1/2 probability that two people will have the same birthday.

My birthday: 4/29

random 1: 6/19

random 2: 3/10

The birthday attack on hash functions is a brute force attack similar to exhaustive key search on cyphers

It generated inputs randomly and hash them

After about sqrt(2^n) = 2 ^ n/2 randomly chosen inputs, a collision pair will occur with high probability

In order to resist birthday attacks, n/2 should be large enough to make such an attack computationally infeasible

Note that it is easier to find collisions than to find preimages or 2nd preimages for a given hash value.

Iterative hash functions divide the input into fixed-size blocks, padding as necessary, and chains together the computation. This is necessary because the message can be any length. The initial value is part of the hashing algorithm specification. MD5, SHA-1, and SHA-2 are iterative hash functions.

It is possible to implement a compression/hash algorithm using a block cypher, as the hash size is equal to the block size in the cypher, in practice the block length is usually not long enough to resist the birthday attack, for example, AES is only 128 bits.

SHA-1 was broken recently. They managed to produce 2 meaningful pdf files with identical SHA-1 hash, running on 110 GPUs for 1 year, where a brute-force attack would have needed 12 million GPUs in the same time.

SHA-2 is similar, and comes in 256 and 512 bit versions, as well as truncated versions thereof

SHA-3 was accepted as a standard in 2012\. SHA-2 is still good, but SHA-3 does the same thing in a different way. It uses a “sponge construction”, it makes a permutation, combines “rate” with input while preserving “capacity,” which is never output. It is still iterative, but does not compress iteratively. If we need more bits than the rate, we perform another iteration on the state, then continue as necessary, if fewer are needed, it truncates.

A MAC function (Message Authentication Code function) is a functions that maps an arbitrarily long message and a k-bit key into a n-bit fixed-length output. It is basically hash + key.

MAC functions provide both message authentication (identity of the sender) and integrity protection (accuracy of the message).

MAC attacker models (objective and capabilities)

possible objectives:

* forge valid MAC values without knowledge of key
* recover the MAC key

availible knowledge

* known message-MAC pairs
* MAC values for adaptively chosen messages (advanced)

Desired MAC properties:

* key non-recovery: it should be hard to recover the secret key K given one or more message-MAC pairs for K
* computation resistance: given zero or more message-MAC pairs, it is hard to find a new valid message-MAC pair for any new message m != m’. This implies key non-recovery but the inverse generally does not.

A brute-force attack can be based on the key or the message. Meet in the middle attacks are a varient of the birthday paradox that uses a random subset to square root the brute force time needed.

A naive MAC construction is the “secret prefix” which appends the key to the message, then hashes. This is not secure, it allows the computation of a MAC on an extended message without using the key. Similarly, the key should not be the initial value of the constructor. Another naive construction is to hash the message then encrypt the hash. This allows the attacker to try to break the hash offline, no oracle needed. For sufficient collision resistance, the hash would be too long to encrypt.

We have standard mac functions like HMAC. It hashes the key at the beginning and the end of the message, preventing extension from either side. CBC MAC uses a block cypher to implement the MAC, and take advantage of the fact that each block depends on every preceeding bit of the plaintext. However, CBC MAC is vulnerable to some forgery attacks, but only with an oracle.