With public-key encryption, the decoding key is secret, and computing the encoding key from the decoding key is easy. However, computing the decoding key from the encoding key is hard, so the encoding key can be made public.

RSA is the example of public key cryptography that I have heard of.

public-key encryption schemes are several orders of magnitude slower than the best known symmetric key cyphers. Thus, in practice, it is only used to encrypt symmetric keys which are then used to encrypt the data itself, and send the keys with the data.

Semantic security is the idea that you can’t extract meaningful information about the plaintext from the cypher text. This is non-trivial in public key because attackers can identically encode plaintext using the public key.

An adversary should not be able to choose two plaintexts X and X’ and later distinguish between the encryptions of those two messages. The solution is probabilistic encryption, which uses a random factor in the input.

Security algorithms are generally related to the difficulty of some problems that are intensive enough to be considered one-way functions, like prime factorization and discrete logarithms. Sometimes, proving the breaking of an encryption scheme would represent an efficient solution to the related hard problems (reduction), although widely used practical schemes have no complete proofs.

Key-pair generation algorithm

* Choose two large primes p and q (easy)
* let n = pq, phi(n) = (p-1)(q-1) (exactly the number of prime numbers less than n)(easy)
* choose e such that 1 \< e \< phi(n)and gcd(e, phi(n)) and gcd(e, phi(n)) = 1 (easy)
* compute the inverse d of e mod p (easy knowing p and q)

Output public key (e, n)

Output private key (d, p, q)

Encryption algorithm: represent plaintext message as an integer

Compute the cyphertext c = (m^e) mod d

Decrpytion algorithm: compute plaintext

Compute from cyphertext, m = (c^d) mod n

It works because math proof.

Security of RSA

* Based on factoring integers
* Computing D from (e, n) is equivalent to factoring n
* Comuting m from c and \*e,n) is not equivalent to factoring n
* Textbook/basic RSA is not semantically secure

RSA Problems

* Has some

If a message is too small, either run something else or pad it.

Chinese remained theorem: if n1 to nk are otherwise pairwise relativity primes, then there is a congruence system that has a unique modulo solution.

RSA method has homomorphic property, where encrypting the product of two messages is the same as modding the messages vs the keys. This leads to an adaptive chosen-cyphertext attack on RSA. Again, use cryptographic hash functions and some randomness to hash in randomness in order to prevent two runs of the system with the same input from having the same output.

RSA is malleable, it can be circumvented by imposing some structural constraints on plaintext messages.

Establish a common secret value that works even with someone observing the communications using ElGamel:

A chooses a random value and sends G(x) to B. B puts the value into the generator function J, to generate Y. B sends G(y) to A, and they have a common secret value. A knows g(y)(x) and B knows g(x)(y) = g(xy) = g(xy), so the value is shared. It is impossible, though, to compute g(xy) from g(x) and g(y), as there is no exponent. for g^H, it is hard to see if H equals x times y or is just a random value (factorization)

This protocol becomes a public key encryption scheme by establishing a public key and private key, then using it to encrypt data. g(x) is the public key and x is the secret key, g(y) is the other public key and y is the other private key. Then, to encrypt the message, use the public and private keys. Decrypt by computing c1 to the x and dividing c2 by that.

This is in fact semantically secure, as the randomization comes from the encryptor choosing different y values each time, so different runs with the same message will be different.

EIGamel encryption has a reduction to a hard problem and is semantically secure. It is not very efficient, as EIGamal is essentially defined over a multiplicitave cyclic group. But, we can choose a different, isomorphic group for greater efficiency, somehow.